Creating a Dask-DataFrame Collection with from_map (#161)
dask/dask-blog: _posts/2023-X-X-from-map.md

---
layout: post

> title: Deep Dive: Creating a Dask-DataFrame Collection with from_map

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Deep Dive: Creating a Dask DataFrame Collection with from_map
```

author: Rick Zamora
tags: [dataframe, IO]
theme: twitter
---

{% include JB/setup %}

> Dask DataFrame provides dedicated IO functions for several popular tabular-data formats, like CSV and Parquet. If you are working with a supported format, then the corresponding function (e.g `read_csv`) is likely to be the most reliable way to create a new Dask DataFrame collection. For other workflows, `from_map` now offers a convenient way to define a DataFrame collection as an arbitrary function mapping. While these kinds of workflows have historically required users to adopt the Dask-Delayed API, `from_map` now makes custom collection creation both easier and more performant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Dask DataFrame](https://docs.dask.org/en/stable/dataframe.html) provides dedicated IO functions for several popular tabular-data formats, like CSV and Parquet. If you are working with a supported format, then the corresponding function (e.g `read_csv`) is likely to be the most reliable way to create a new Dask DataFrame collection. For other workflows, [`from_map`](https://docs.dask.org/en/stable/generated/dask.dataframe.from_map.html) now offers a convenient way to define a DataFrame collection as an arbitrary function mapping. While these kinds of workflows have historically required users to adopt the Dask Delayed API, `from_map` now makes custom collection creation both easier and more performant.
```

## What is `from_map`?

> The `from_map` API was added to Dask DataFrame in v2022.05.1 with the intention of replacing `from_delayed` as the recommended means of custom DataFrame creation. At its core, `from_map` simply converts each element of an iterable object (`inputs`) into a distinct Dask-DataFrame partition, using a common function (`func`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `from_map` API was added to Dask DataFrame in v2022.05.1 with the intention of replacing `from_delayed` as the recommended means of custom DataFrame creation. At its core, `from_map` simply converts each element of an iterable object (`inputs`) into a distinct Dask DataFrame partition, using a common function (`func`):
```

```python
dd.from_map(func: Callable, iterable: Iterable) -> dd.DataFrame
```

> The overall behavior is essentially the Dask-DataFrame equivalent of the standard-Python `map` function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The overall behavior is essentially the Dask DataFrame equivalent of the standard-Python `map` function:
```

```python
map(func: Callable, iterable: Iterable) -> Iterator
```

Note that both `from_map` and `map` actually support an arbitrary number of iterable inputs. However, we will only focus on the use of a single iterable argument in this post.

## A simple example

To better understand the behavior of `from_map`, let’s consider the simple case that we want to interact with Feather-formatted data created with the following Pandas code:

```python
import pandas as pd

size = 3
paths = ["./data.0.feather", "./data.1.feather"]
for i, path in enumerate(paths):
    index = range(i * size, i * size + size)
    a = [i] * size
    b = list("xyz")
    df = pd.DataFrame({"A": a, "B": b, "index": index})
    df.to_feather(path)
```

> Since Dask does not yet offer a dedicated `read_feather` function (as of `dask-2023.3.1`), most users would assume that the only option to create a Dask-DataFrame collection is to use `dask.delayed`. The “best practice” for creating a collection in this case, however, is to wrap `pd.read_feather` or `cudf.read_feather` in a `from_map` call like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Dask does not yet offer a dedicated `read_feather` function (as of `dask-2023.3.1`), most users would assume that the only option to create a Dask DataFrame collection is to use `dask.delayed`. The “best practice” for creating a collection in this case, however, is to wrap `pd.read_feather` or `cudf.read_feather` in a `from_map` call like so:
```

```python
>>> import dask.dataframe as dd
>>> ddf = dd.from_map(pd.read_feather, paths)
>>> ddf
Dask DataFrame Structure:
                   A       B  index
npartitions=2
               int64  object  int64
                 ...     ...    ...
                 ...     ...    ...
Dask Name: read_feather, 1 graph layer
```

Which produces the following Pandas (or cuDF) object after computation:

```python
>>> ddf.compute()
   A  B  index
0  0  x      0
1  0  y      1
2  0  z      2
0  1  x      3
1  1  y      4
2  1  z      5
```

> Although the same output can be achieved using the conventional `dd.from_delayed` strategy, using `from_map` is likely to improve the available opportunities for task-graph optimization within Dask.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although the same output can be achieved using the conventional `dd.from_delayed` strategy, using `from_map` will improve the available opportunities for task-graph optimization within Dask.
```

## Performance considerations: Specifying `meta` and `divisions`

Although `func` and `iterable` are the only _required_ arguments to `from_map`, one can significantly improve the overall performance of a workflow by specifying optional arguments like `meta` and `divisions`.

> Due to the lazy nature of Dask-DataFrame, each collection is required to carry around a schema (column name and dtype information) in the form of an empty Pandas (or cuDF) object. If `meta` is not directly provided to the `from_map` function, the schema will need to be populated by eagerly materializing the first partition, which can increase the apparent latency of the `from_map` API call itself. For this reason, it is always recommended to specify an explicit `meta` argument if the expected column names and dtypes are known a priori.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to the lazy nature of Dask DataFrame, each collection is required to carry around a schema (column name and dtype information) in the form of an empty Pandas (or cuDF) object. If `meta` is not directly provided to the `from_map` function, the schema will need to be populated by eagerly materializing the first partition, which can increase the apparent latency of the `from_map` API call itself. For this reason, it is always recommended to specify an explicit `meta` argument if the expected column names and dtypes are known a priori.
```

While passing in a `meta` argument is likely to reduce the`from_map` API call latency, passing in a `divisions` argument makes it possible to reduce the end-to-end compute time. This is because, by specifying `divisions`, we are allowing Dask DataFrame to track useful per-partition min/max statistics. Therefore, if the overall workflow involves grouping or joining on the index, Dask can avoid the need to perform unnecessary shuffling operations.

## Using `from_map` to implement a custom API

> Although it is currently difficult to automatically extract division information from the metadata of an arbitrary Feather dataset, `from_map` makes it relatively easy to implement your own highly-functional `read_feather` API using PyArrow. For example, the following code is all that one needs to enable lazy Feather IO with both column projection and index selection:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although it is currently difficult to automatically extract division information from the metadata of an arbitrary Feather dataset, `from_map` makes it relatively easy to implement your own highly-functional `read_feather` API using [PyArrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/index.html). For example, the following code is all that one needs to enable lazy Feather IO with both column projection and index selection:
```

```python
def from_arrow(table):
    """(Optional) Utility to enforce 'backend' configuration"""
    from dask import config

    if config.get("dataframe.backend") == "cudf":
        import cudf

        return cudf.DataFrame.from_arrow(table)
    else:

>         return table.to_pandas()

Reviewer: I'd like a non-NVIDIA review on this little CPU/GPU helper utility. I think this is great to show a little about how things can work with multiple backends but I'm also not sure it is clear here what is going on for folks unfamiliar with RAPIDS or backends in Dask. So maybe at the least, the docstring of this function could be expanded a little.

Perhaps someone like @jrbourbeau could weigh in?

Reviewer: This has sat for 9 days now so I'm going to move forwards with this.

The second step is to define the underlying function (`func`) that we will use to produce each of our final DataFrame partitions. Third, we define one or more iterable objects containing the unique information needed to produce each partition (`iterable`). In this case, the only iterable object corresponds to a generator of `pyarrow.dataset` fragments, which is essentially a wrapper around the input path list.

The fourth and final step is to use the final `func`, `interable`, and `meta` information to call the `from_map` API. Note that we also use this opportunity to specify additional key-word arguments, like `columns` and `index`. In contrast to the iterable positional arguments, which are always mapped to `func`, these key-word arguments will be broadcasted.

> Using the`read_feather` implementation above, it becomes both easy and efficient to convert an arbitrary Feather dataset into a lazy Dask-DataFrame collection:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the`read_feather` implementation above, it becomes both easy and efficient to convert an arbitrary Feather dataset into a lazy Dask DataFrame collection:
```

That is, all we need to do is change “Step 2” of our implementation to use the following code instead:

```python
    from dask.dataframe.io.utils import DataFrameIOFunction

    class ReadFeather(DataFrameIOFunction):
        """Create a Pandas/cuDF DataFrame from a dataset fragment"""
        def __init__(self, columns, index):
            self._columns = columns
            self.index = index

        @property
        def columns(self):
            return self._columns

        def project_columns(self, columns):
            # Replace this object with one that will only read `columns`
            if columns != self.columns:
                return ReadFeather(columns, self.index)
            return self

        def __call__(self, frag):
            # Same logic as original `func`
            read_columns = self.columns
            if index and self.index not in self.columns:
                read_columns = self.columns + [self.index]
            df = from_arrow(frag.to_table(columns=read_columns))
            df = df.set_index(self.index) if self.index else df
            return df[self.columns] if self.columns else df

    func = ReadFeather(columns, index)
```

## Conclusion

> It is now easier than ever to create a Dask-DataFrame collection from an arbitrary data source. Although the `dask.delayed` API has already enabled similar functionality for many years, `from_map` now makes it possible to implement a custom IO function without sacrificing any of the high-level graph optimizations leveraged by the rest of the Dask-DataFrame API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is now easier than ever to create a Dask DataFrame collection from an arbitrary data source. Although the `dask.delayed` API has already enabled similar functionality for many years, `from_map` now makes it possible to implement a custom IO function without sacrificing any of the high-level graph optimizations leveraged by the rest of the Dask DataFrame API.
```

> Start experimenting with `from_map` today, and let us know how it goes!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start experimenting with [`from_map`](https://docs.dask.org/en/stable/generated/dask.dataframe.from_map.html) today, and let us know how it goes!
```

---
layout: post
title: Deep Dive: Creating a Dask-DataFrame Collection with from_map
author: Rick Zamora
tags: [dataframe, IO]
theme: twitter
---

{% include JB/setup %}

Dask DataFrame provides dedicated IO functions for several popular tabular-data formats, like CSV and Parquet. If you are working with a supported format, then the corresponding function (e.g `read_csv`) is likely to be the most reliable way to create a new Dask DataFrame collection. For other workflows, `from_map` now offers a convenient way to define a DataFrame collection as an arbitrary function mapping. While these kinds of workflows have historically required users to adopt the Dask-Delayed API, `from_map` now makes custom collection creation both easier and more performant.

## What is `from_map`?

The from_map API was added to Dask DataFrame in v2022.05.1 with the intention of replacing `from_delayed` as the recommended means of custom DataFrame creation. At its core, `from_map` simply converts each element of an iterable object (`inputs`) into a distinct Dask-DataFrame partition, using a common function (`func`):

```python

> dd.from_map(Callable: func, Iterable: iterable) -> dd.DataFrame

Reviewer 2: A bit of a nitpick, but maybe swap the parameter names & types?

```suggestion
dd.from_map(func: Callable, iterable: Iterable) -> dd.DataFrame
```

Same for line 24.

Author: Oops!
